Consensus/social proof revolves around the belief that without an explicit instruction to behave in a certain way, people will follow social norms. It is typically polite to assist someone with their hands full.

Familiarity/Liking is when an attacker uses charisma to persuade others to do as requested. They downplay their requests to make it seem like their request is not out of the ordinary.

Authority and Intimidation can be used by an attacker by pretending to be someone senior. The person receiving the request would feel the need to take action quickly and without questioning the attacker.

Identity fraud is a specific type of impersonation where the attacker uses specific details (such as personal information) of someone's identity.


Shoulder surfing is stealing a password by watching the user type it. Although the attacker was not looking over the employee’s shoulder, the login credentials were obtained through observation.

Vishing is a phishing attack conducted through a voice channel. With no clue about the nature of the call received by the employee, it cannot be assumed to be part of an attack and would not be the best answer.

While a lunchtime attack involves leaving a workstation unattended, it does not involve obtaining a password. Rather, physical access to the system is gained through a logged-in computer.

A man-in-the-middle attack occurs when an attacker sits between two communicating hosts to intercept information. It is not social engineering.


Phishing and shoulder surfing are social engineering attacks. Phishing occurs when an attacker sends a legitimate-looking, spoofed email to a user of the spoofed site to trick the user into revealing private information.

Shoulder surfing is used to obtain someone’s password or PIN by observing a user typing it on the keyboard. Social engineering is malicious behavior meant to get users to reveal confidential information.

Ethical hacking is trying to identify weaknesses in a network. It is done with permission and is not malicious in intent.

An influence campaign is a program launched by an adversary with a high level of capability. The goal of an influence campaign is to shift public opinion on some topic.

Pharming is a means of redirecting users from a legitimate website to a malicious one that relies on corrupting the way the victim's computer performs IP address resolution. This is illustrated in the bank customer scenario.

Phishing is a type of email-based social engineering attack, in which the attacker sends email from a supposedly reputable source to try to elicit private information from the victim. This is exhibited in the insurance customer scenario.

Vishing is a phishing attack conducted through a voice channel. This is seen in the IT department scenario.

A watering hole attack relies on the circumstance that a group of targets may use an unsecure third-party website. This is shown in the sales department scenario.


SMiShing attempts use short message service (SMS) text communications as the vector.

Phishing is a combination of social engineering and spoofing. It persuades or tricks the target into interacting with a malicious resource disguised as a trusted one, traditionally using email as the vector.

Vishing is a phishing attack conducted through a voice channel, such as telephone or VoIP. Vishing attempts may succeed when a target finds it more difficult to refuse a request made in a phone call compared to one made in an email.

Prepending can make a phishing or hoax email more convincing. Used offensively, prepending means adding text that appears to have been generated by the mail system.


Keyboard encryption software is used to protect against keyloggers, which record keystrokes for the purpose of stealing data. Keyloggers are spyware.

Single sign-on is a technology that enables a user to authenticate once and receive authorizations for multiple services. It does not require keyboard encryption.

Input validation involves limiting the type of data a user can enter into specific fields, such as not allowing special characters in a user name field. Encryption is not a concern.

Key management is the process of administering cryptographic keys and is performed by a Certificate Authority. It is not applicable to keyboard encryption.

A rootkit is characterized by its ability to hide itself by changing core system files and programming interfaces and to escalate privileges. The gaming company accomplished this.

Trojans cannot conceal their presence entirely and will surface as a running process or service. While a rootkit is a type of Trojan or spyware, it differs in its ability to hide itself.

Spyware monitors user activity and may be installed with or without the user's knowledge, but it cannot gain administrative privileges or hide itself.

A keylogger is also a type of spyware that records a user’s keystrokes. It occurs without a user’s knowledge, but it cannot hide itself or gain privileges.


Keyloggers actively attempt to steal confidential information by recording the keystrokes of a user.

Key management is the process of administering cryptographic keys and managing their usage, storage, expiration, renewal, revocation, recovery, and escrow. It does not describe something that a hacker would install.

Encryption is a way of encoding data into ciphertext, which is unreadable unless it is decoded. Keyloggers are only interested in recording keystrokes, not decrypting data.

Obfuscation is a technique that essentially "hides" or "camouflages" code or other information so that it is harder to read by unauthorized users. Keyloggers do not want to hide anything, they want to steal useful information by capturing keystrokes.


With a boot virus, code is written to the disk boot sector or the partition table of a fixed disk or USB media. The code executes as a memory resident process when the OS starts.

Script and macro viruses use the programming features available in local scripting engines for the OS and/or browser, such as PowerShell.

A computer worm is memory-resident malware that can run without user intervention and replicate over network resources.

Spyware is malware that can perform adware-like tracking, but also monitor local application activity, take screenshots, and activate recording devices.


Both a program and script virus can use a PDF as a vector. The user stated that a PDF file was recently opened. A program virus is executed when an application is executed. Executable objects can also be embedded or attached within other file types such as Microsoft Word and Rich Text Format.

A script virus typically targets [[vulnerability|vulnerabilities]] in an interpreter. Scripts are powerful languages used to automate operating system functions and add interactivity to web pages and are executed by an interpreter rather than self-executing. PDF documents have become a popular vector for script viruses.

A boot sector virus is one that attacks the disk boot sector information, the partition table, and sometimes the file system.

A trojan is a type of virus that infiltrates a system and creates a vector for other viruses or attackers to get into the system.



