#threat  
 **Intelligence fusion and threat data**—[[threat hunting]] can be performed by manual analysis of network and log data, but this is a very lengthy process. An organization with a security information and event management ([[SIEM]]) and threat analytics platform can apply intelligence fusion techniques. The analytics platform is kept up to date with a [[TTPs]] and [[IoC]] threat data feed. Analysts can develop queries and filters to correlate threat data against on-premises data from network traffic and logs. This process may also be partially or wholly automated using AI-assisted analysis and correlation.
-   **Maneuver**—when investigating a suspected live threat, you must remember the adversarial nature of hacking. A capable [[threat actor]] is likely to have anticipated the likelihood of [[threat hunting]], and attempted to deploy countermeasures to frustrate detection. For example, the attacker may trigger a [[DDoS]] attack to divert the security team's attention, and then attempt to accelerate plans to achieve actions on objectives. **Maneuver is a military doctrine term relating to obtaining positional advantage** ([ccdcoe.org/uploads/2012/01/3_3_Applegate_ThePrincipleOfManeuverInCyberOperations.pdf](https://wmx-api-production.s3.amazonaws.com/courses/5731/supplementary/3_3_Applegate_ThePrincipleOfManeuverInCyberOperations.pdf)). As an example of defensive maneuver, [[threat hunting]] might use passive discovery techniques so that [[threat actor]]s are given no hint that an intrusion has been discovered before the security team has a containment, eradication, and recovery plan.