---
tags: [GRC, A_D,section]
---
# LESSON INTRODUCTION

If people are an organization's most important asset, then data comes a close second. The rapid adoption of cybersecurity awareness and technologies has come about because of the huge reputational and financial costs of high-profile data and privacy breaches. It is usually data that the [[threat actor]]s want, and data that the whole system is set up to protect.

The **confidentiality, integrity, and availability** security attributes of [[data processing]] and [[storage]] are ensured through a mixture of **managerial, operational, and technical controls**. Along with security, you should also be able to assess privacy factors when collecting and storing data, and identify how processes must be shaped by legislative and regulatory compliance.

## 

LESSON OBJECTIVES

In this lesson, you will:

-   Explain privacy and data sensitivity concepts.
-   Explain privacy and data protection controls.
# EXAM OBJECTIVES COVERED

2.1 Explain the importance of security concepts in an enterprise environment

5.3 Explain the importance of policies to organizational security

5.5 Explain privacy and sensitive data concepts in relation to security

A detailed understanding of privacy and data sensitivity concepts will help you to operate within an overall data governance team. **Data security and privacy are areas where policy and procedure are as important as technical controls in ensuring compliance.** These policies and procedures may also need to be expressed in agreements with external partners, suppliers, and customers. As a security professional, you will need to select and apply these policies, procedures, and agreements wisely.
# PRIVACY AND SENSITIVE DATA CONCEPTS

The value of information assets can be thought of in terms of how a compromise of the data's security attributes of the confidentiality, integrity, and availability ([[CIA]]) triad would impact the organization. When surveying information within an organization, it is important not to solely judge how secretly it might need to be kept, but how the data is used within workflows. For example, the risk to confidentiality of public information is nonexistent. The risk to availability, however, could have significant impacts on workflows.

**Data must be kept securely within a processing and storage system that enforces CIA attributes. In practice, this will mean a file or database management system that provides read or read/write access to authorized and authenticated accounts or denies access otherwise (by being encrypted, for instance).** As distinct from this security requirement, you also need to consider the impact of privacy in shaping data governance.

### Privacy versus Security

While data security is important, privacy is an equally vital factor. Privacy is a data governance requirement that arises when collecting and processing personal data. **Personal data is any information about an identifiable individual person, referred to as the data subject.** Where **data security controls focus on the CIA attributes of the processing system**, 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
**privacy requires policies to identify private data, ensure that storage, processing, and retention is compliant with relevant regulations, limit access to the private data to authorized persons only, and ensure the rights of data** subjects to review and remove any information held about them are met.

### Information Life Cycle Management

An information life cycle model identifies [[discrete]] steps to assist security and privacy policy design. Most models identify the following general stages:

-   **Creation/collection**—data may be generated by an employee or automated system, or it may be submitted by a customer or supplier. At this stage, the data needs to be classified and tagged.
-   **Distribution/use**—data is made available on a need to know basis for authorized uses by authenticated account holders and third parties.
-   **Retention**—for regulatory reasons, data might have to be kept in an archive past the date when it is still used.
-   **Disposal**—when it no longer needs to be used or retained, media storing data assets must be sanitized to remove any remnants.

Information management is a massive task in any organization. Most schemes focus on [[structured data]] (that is, information that is stored in a directory hierarchy and subject to administrative access controls). Managing and classifying [[unstructured data]] (emails, chat sessions, telephone calls, and so on) is an even more daunting task, though software solutions designed to tackle this problem are available.
# DATA ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

A **data governance** policy describes the [[security control]] that will be applied to protect data at each stage of its life cycle. There are important institutional governance roles for oversight and management of information assets within the life cycle:

-   **Data owner**—a senior (executive) role with ultimate responsibility for maintaining the [[CIA]] confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the information asset. The owner is responsible for labeling the asset (such as determining who should have access and determining the asset's criticality and sensitivity) and ensuring that it is protected with appropriate controls (access control, backup, retention, and so forth). The owner also typically selects a steward and custodian and directs their actions and sets the budget and resource allocation for sufficient controls.
-   **Data steward**—this role is primarily responsible for **data quality**. This involves tasks such as ensuring data is labeled and identified with appropriate metadata and that data is collected and stored in a format and with values that comply with applicable laws and regulations.
-   **Data custodian**—this role handles managing the **system** on which the data assets are stored. This includes responsibility for enforcing access control, encryption, and backup/recovery measures.
-   **Data Privacy Officer** (DPO)—this role is responsible for oversight of any personally identifiable information ([[PII]]) assets managed by the company. The privacy officer ensures that the processing, disclosure, and retention of PII complies with legal and regulatory frameworks.

In the context of legislation and regulations protecting personal privacy, the following two institutional roles are important:

-   **Data controller**—the entity responsible for determining why and how data is stored, collected, and used and for ensuring that these purposes and means are lawful. The data controller has ultimate responsibility for privacy breaches, and is not permitted to transfer that responsibility.
-   **Data processor**—an entity engaged by the data controller to assist with technical collection, storage, or analysis tasks. A data processor follows the instructions of a data controller with regard to collection or processing.

Data controller and processor tend to be **organizational roles rather than individual ones**. For example, if Widget.foo collects personal data to operate a webstore on its own cloud, it is a data controller and data processor. If Widget.foo passes aggregate data to Grommet.foo asking them to run profitability analytics for different customer segments on its AI-backed cloud, Grommet.foo is a data processor acting under the instruction of Widget.foo. Within the Grommet.foo and Widget.foo companies, the data owner might take personal responsibility for the lawful performance of data controller and processor functions.
# DATA CLASSIFICATIONS

Data classification and typing schemas tag data assets so that they can be managed through the information life cycle. A data classification schema is a decision tree for applying one or more tags or labels to each data asset. Many data classification schemas are based on the degree of confidentiality required:

-   **Public (unclassified)**—there are no restrictions on viewing the data. Public information presents no risk to an organization if it is disclosed but does present a risk if it is modified or not available.
-   **Confidential (secret)**—the information is highly sensitive, for viewing only by approved persons within the owner organization, and possibly by trusted third parties under NDA.
-   **Critical (top secret)**—the information is too valuable to allow any risk of its capture. Viewing is severely restricted.

![Screenshot of Label: Confidential settings in left pane and Condition settings in right pane." aria-label="The settings for Label: Confidential are: Color (Orange); Set permissions for documents and emails containing this label (Not configured); Set visual marking (such as header or footer): Documents with this label have a header (Off), Documents with this label have a footer (Off), Documents with this label have a watermark (On), Watermark text (This document contains personal information that must be kept confidential), Watermark font size (Auto).
Settings for Condition include: Choose the type of condition (Information Types); Select information types (USA); Name [USA Social Security Number (SSN)]; Minimum number of occurrences (1); Count occurrences with unique values only (Off).](https://s3.amazonaws.com/wmx-api-production/courses/5731/images/7206-1599771810744.png)

Using Microsoft Azure Information Protection to define an automatic document labeling and watermarking policy. (Screenshot used with permission from Microsoft.)

Another type of [[classification schema]] identifies the kind of information asset:

-   **Proprietary**—proprietary information or intellectual property ([[IP]]) is information created and owned by the company, typically about the products or services that they make or perform. IP is an obvious target for a company's competitors, and IP in some industries (such as defense or energy) is of interest to foreign governments. IP may also represent a counterfeiting opportunity (movies, music, and books, for instance).
-   **Private/personal** data—information that relates to an individual identity.
-   **Sensitive**—This label is typically used in the context of personal data in which privacy-sensitive information about a subject could harm them if made public and could prejudice decisions made about the subject. As defined by the EU's General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR), sensitive personal data includes religious beliefs, political opinions, trade union membership, gender, sexual orientation, racial or ethnic origin, genetic data, and health information ([ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/reform/rules-business-and-organisations/legal-grounds-processing-data/sensitive-data/what-personal-data-considered-sensitive_en](https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/reform/rules-business-and-organisations/legal-grounds-processing-data/sensitive-data/what-personal-data-considered-sensitive_en)).
# DATA TYPES

A type schema applies a more detailed label to data than simple classification.

### Personally Identifiable Information (PII)

Personally identifiable information ([[PII]]) is data that can be used to identify, contact, or locate an individual. A Social Security Number (SSN) is a good example of PII. Others include name, date of birth, email address, telephone number, street address, biometric data, and so on. Some bits of information, such as a SSN, may be unique; others uniquely identify an individual in combination (for example, full name with birth date and street address).

Some types of information may be PII depending on the context. For example, when someone browses the web using a static IP address, the IP address is PII. An address that is dynamically assigned by the ISP may not be considered PII. **PII is often used for password reset mechanisms and to confirm identity over the telephone.** For example, **PII may be defined as responses to challenge questions**, such as "What is your favorite color/pet/movie?" These are the sort of complexities that must be considered when laws are introduced to control the collection and storage of personal data.

### Customer Data

Customer data can be institutional information, but also personal information about the customer's employees, such as sales and technical support contacts. This personal customer data should be treated as [[PII]]. Institutional information might be shared under a nondisclosure agreement (NDA), placing contractual obligations on storing and processing it securely.

### Health Information

Personal health information ([[PHI]])—or protected health information—refers to medical and insurance records, plus associated hospital and laboratory test results. PHI may be associated with a specific person or used as an anonymized or deidentified data set for analysis and research. An anonymized data set is one where the identifying data is removed completely. A deidentified set contains codes that allow the subject information to be reconstructed by the data provider.

**PHI trades at high values on the black market**, making it an attractive target. Criminals seek to exploit the data for insurance fraud or possibly to blackmail victims. PHI data is extremely sensitive and its loss has a permanent effect. Unlike a credit card number or bank account number, it cannot be changed. Consequently, the reputational damage that would be caused by a PHI data breach is huge.

### Financial Information

Financial information refers to data held about bank and investment accounts, plus information such as payroll and tax returns. Payment card information comprises the card number, expiry date, and the multi-digit **card verification value** (CVV). Cards are also associated with a PIN, but this should never be transmitted to or handled by the merchant. Abuse of the card may also require the holder's name and the address the card is registered to. The **Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard** ([[PCI DSS]]) defines the safe handling and storage of this information ([pcisecuritystandards.org/pci_security](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/pci_security/)).

### Government Data

Internally, government agencies have complex data collection and processing requirements. In the US, federal laws place certain requirements on institutions that collect and process data about citizens and taxpayers. This data may be shared with companies for analysis under strict agreements to preserve security and privacy.
# PRIVACY NOTICES AND DATA RETENTION

Data owners should be aware of any legal or regulatory issues that impact collection and processing of personal data. The right to privacy, as enacted by regulations such as the **EU's General Data Protection Regulation** ([[GDPR]]), means that personal data cannot be collected, processed, or retained without the individual's informed consent. GDPR ([ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr](https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr)) gives data subjects rights to withdraw consent, and to inspect, amend, or erase data held about them.

### Privacy Notices

**Informed consent** means that the data must be collected and processed only for the **stated purpose**, and that purpose must be clearly described to the user in plain language, **not legalese**. This consent statement is referred to as a privacy notice. Data collected under that consent statement cannot then be used for any other purpose. For example, if you collect an email address for use as an account ID, you may not send marketing messages to that email address without obtaining separate consent for that discrete purpose. Purpose limitation will also restrict your ability to transfer data to third parties.

### Impact Assessments

Tracking consent statements and keeping data usage in compliance with the consent granted is a significant management task. In organizations that process large amounts of personal data, **technical tools that perform tagging and cross-referencing of personal data records will be required**. A data protection impact assessment is a process designed to identify the risks of collecting and processing personal data in the context of a business workflow or project and to identify mechanisms that mitigate those risks.

### Data Retention

Data retention refers to backing up and archiving information assets in order to comply with business policies and/or applicable laws and regulations. **To meet compliance and e-discovery requirements, organizations may be legally bound to retain certain types of data for a specified period.** This type of requirement will particularly affect financial data and security log data. Conversely, storage limitation principles in privacy legislation may prevent you from retaining personal data for longer than is necessary. This can complicate the inclusion of PII in backups and archives.
# DATA SOVEREIGNTY AND GEOGRAPHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

Some states and nations may respect data privacy more or less than others; and likewise, some nations may disapprove of the nature and content of certain data. They may even be suspicious of security measures such as encryption. When your data is stored or transmitted in other jurisdictions, or **when you collect data from citizens in other states or other countries, you may not "own" the data** in the same way as you'd expect or like to. 

### Data Sovereignty

Data sovereignty refers to a jurisdiction preventing or restricting processing and storage from taking place on systems which do not **physically reside within that jurisdiction**. Data sovereignty may demand certain concessions on your part, such as using location-specific storage facilities in a cloud service.

For example, GDPR protections are extended to any EU citizen while they are within EU or EEA (European Economic Area) borders. Data subjects can consent to allow a transfer but there must be a meaningful option for them to refuse consent. If the transfer destination jurisdiction does not provide adequate privacy regulations (to a level comparable to GDPR), **then contractual safeguards must be given to extend GDPR rights to the data subject**. In the US, companies can self-certify that the protections they offer are adequate under the Privacy Shield scheme ([privacyshield.gov/US-Businesses](https://www.privacyshield.gov/US-Businesses)).

### Geographical Considerations

Geographic access requirements fall into two different scenarios:

-   **Storage locations** might have to be carefully selected to mitigate data sovereignty issues. Most cloud providers allow choice of data centers for processing and storage, ensuring that information is not illegally transferred from a particular privacy jurisdiction without consent.
-   **Employees** needing access from multiple geographic locations. Cloud-based file and database services can apply constraint-based access controls to **validate the user's geographic location before authorizing access**.
# PRIVACY BREACHES AND DATA BREACHES

A **[[data breach]] occurs when information is read, modified, or deleted without authorization**. "Read" in this sense can mean either seen by a person or transferred to a network or storage media. A data breach is the loss of any type of data (but notably corporate information and intellectual property), while a **[[privacy breach]] refers specifically to loss or disclosure of personal and sensitive data**. 

### Organizational Consequences

A data or privacy breach can have severe organizational consequences:

-   **Reputation damage**—data breaches cause widespread negative publicity, and customers are less likely to trust a company that cannot secure its information assets.
-   **Identity theft**—if the breached data is exploited to perform identity theft, the data subject may be able to sue for damages.
-   **Fines**—legislation might empower a regulator to levy fines. These can be fixed sum or in the most serious cases a percentage of turnover.
-   **IP theft**—loss of company data can lead to loss of revenue. This typically occurs when copyright material—unreleased movies and music tracks—is breached. The loss of patents, designs, trade secrets, and so on to competitors or state actors can also cause commercial losses, especially in overseas markets where IP theft may be difficult to remedy through legal action.

### Notifications of Breaches

**The requirements for different types of breach are set out in law and/or in regulations. The requirements indicate who must be notified**. A data breach can mean the loss or theft of information, the accidental disclosure of information, or the loss or damage of information. Note that there are substantial risks from accidental breaches if effective procedures are not in place. If a database administrator can run a query that shows unredacted credit card numbers, that is a data breach, regardless of whether the query ever leaves the database server.

### Escalation

A breach may be detected by technical staff and if the event is considered minor, there may be a temptation to remediate the system and take no further notification action. This could place the company in legal jeopardy. **Any breach of personal data and most breaches of IP should be escalated to senior decision-makers and any impacts from legislation and regulation properly considered.**

### Public Notification and Disclosure

Other than the regulator, notification might need to be made to law enforcement, individuals and third-party companies affected by the breach, and publicly through press or social media channels. For example, the **Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act** ([[HIPAA]]) sets out **reporting requirements in legislation**, requiring breach notification to the affected individuals, the Secretary of the US Department of Health and Human Services, and, if more than [[500]] individuals are affected, to the media ([hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/breach-notification/index.html](https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/breach-notification/index.html)). The requirements also set out timescales for when these parties should be notified. For example, under [[GDPR]], notification must be made within [[72]] hours of becoming aware of a breach of personal data ([csoonline.com/article/3383244/how-to-report-a-data-breach-under-gdpr.html](https://www.csoonline.com/article/3383244/how-to-report-a-data-breach-under-gdpr.html)). Regulations will also set out disclosing requirements, or the information that must be provided to each of the affected parties. **Disclosure is likely to include a description of what information was breached, details for the main point-of-contact, likely consequences arising from the breach, and measures taken to mitigate the breach.**

GDPR offers stronger protections than most federal and state laws in the US, which tend to focus on industry-specific regulations, narrower definitions of personal data, and fewer rights and protections for data subjects. The passage of the **California Consumer Privacy Act** ([[CCPA]]) has changed the picture for domestic US legislation, however ([csoonline.com/article/3292578/california-consumer-privacy-act-what-you-need-to-know-to-be-compliant.html](https://www.csoonline.com/article/3292578/california-consumer-privacy-act-what-you-need-to-know-to-be-compliant.html)).
# DATA SHARING AND PRIVACY TERMS OF AGREEMENT

It is important to remember that although one can outsource virtually any service or activity to a third party, **one cannot outsource legal accountability for these services or actions**. You are ultimately responsible for the services and actions that these third parties take. If they have any access to your data or systems, any security breach in their organization (for example, unauthorized data sharing) is effectively a breach in yours. Issues of security risk awareness, shared duties, and contractual responsibilities can be set out in a formal legal agreement. The following types of agreements are common:

-   **Service level agreement** ([[SLA]])—a contractual agreement setting out the detailed terms under which a service is provided. This can include terms for security access controls and risk assessments plus processing requirements for confidential and private data.
-   **Interconnection security agreement** ([[ISA]])—ISAs are defined by NIST's SP800-47 "Security Guide for Interconnecting Information Technology Systems" ([csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-47/final](https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-47/final)). Any federal agency interconnecting its IT system to a third party must create an ISA to govern the relationship. An ISA sets out a security risk awareness process and commits the agency and supplier to implementing security controls.
-   **Nondisclosure agreement** ([[NDA]])—legal basis for protecting information assets. NDAs are used between companies and employees, between companies and contractors, and between two companies. If the employee or contractor breaks this agreement and does share such information, they may face legal consequences. NDAs are useful because they deter employees and contractors from violating the trust that an employer places in them.
-   **Data sharing and use agreement**—under privacy regulations such as GDPR or HIPAA, personal data can only be collected for a specific purpose. Data sets can be subject to pseudo-anonymization or deidentification to remove personal data, but there are risks of reidentification if combined with other data sources. A data sharing and use agreement is a legal means of preventing this risk. It can specify terms for the way a data set can be analyzed and proscribe the use of reidentification techniques.
